Hi.
In this module,
we're going to talk a little bit more
about dynamic causal modeling, or DCM.
We'll try to understand a little bit
more about the mathematics behind it.
So DCM attempts to model latent neuronal
activation using hemodynamic time series.
This is based on a neuronal
model of interacting regions,
supplemented with a forward
model that tells how the neural
activity is transformed into
the observed hemodynamic response.
So effective connectivity is parameterized
in terms of the coupling among these
latent neuronal activity in different
regions, and we can estimate these
parameters by perturbing the system and
measuring the response.
So here's a little cartoon illustration,
we have two regions here, one and two.
And there's a relationship between
these two regions, so Z1 represents
the neuronal activation in region one, and
Z2 the neuronal activation in region two.
And we see that activation in one gives
rise to activation in two and vice versa.
So this is a very simple model of
what's going on in these two different
brain regions.
Now, however, the problem with this
is that we can't measure neuronal
activation using fMRIs, so
we have to do something else.
So what we do is we
perturb the system here.
So let's say that we have
some sort of task and
this gives rise to
the perturbation as follows.
So, u1 perturbs Z1, so
it might increase the neuronal activation.
And u2 changes the relationship
between regions one and two.
Now once we do that,
this is going to give rise
to changes in the hemodynamic response,
which we can measure.
And so the idea here is that changes in
the neuronal activation gives rise to
the changes in the hemodynamic response,
which we can measure using fMRI.
The goal here now is to take the values
of Y1 and Y2, which we can measure,
and figure out what was going
on on the neuronal level.
So in order to do this,
we have to make some definitions.
So let's define the neuronal states as z.
So z is equal to z1, z2, up to zN,
where we have N different regions.
In our little cartoon, we have two
regions, so z would just be z1 and z2.
Here, the effective connectivity model
is described by the following model.
This a bi-linear equation that tells us
how the neuronal activity
at time t changes.
And here z of t is the neuronal
activity at time t, which is latent.
And u t of y is the jth
of J inputs at time t.
These are known to us,
since we know what we do to the system.
The matrix A represents
the first order connectivity
among regions in the absence of input.
And this specifies how
regions are connected and
whether these connections are uni- or
bidirectional.
The matrix C represents the intrinsic
influence of inputs on the neuronal
activation.
This specifies how these inputs
are connected to the different regions.
Finally the matrices B of j
represent the change in coupling
induced by the jth input.
And this specifies how connections
are changed by the inputs.
So we can see how these equations work
by looking at our simple example again.
So if we do this,
we see that this bi-linear equation
can written in the following form.
So here we see that changes in the
neuronal activation in the two regions,
one and two, depend on the neuronal
activations in the regions at
the current time point, Z1 and Z2,
and also on the inputs u1 and u2.
Now, neuronal activation causes
changes in the blood volume and
deoxyhemoglobin that cause changes
in the observed BOLD response.
And so the hemodynamics in the DCM
model is described using what's called
an extended Balloon model, which involves
a set of hemodynamic state variables,
state equations and
hemodynamic parameters, theta of h.
So, this is what the Extended Balloon
Model looks like, and it's not for
the faint of heart.
So it's a series of differential
equations showing how changes in
activity-dependent signal, flow induction,
changes in blood volume, and
deoxyhemoglobin lead to the changes
in the hemodynamic response.
So we're not going to go
into this in detail, but
just kind of wanted to give you a flavor
that equations like this exist.
Now, summarizing all of this information,
we have different state equations
that we're going to be using in DCM.
So, we have the neuronal state, which is
described by these neuronal activations,
Zt, and these have parameters,
we're going to call them theta of C.
And then we have the hemodynamic states,
which depends on s of t,
v of t and q of t.
And so the observed data is
a function of q of t, of v of t.
And we won't talk about this so much in
detail, but I just want you to know that
such a function exists, and
this has parameters theta of h.
So we can combine the neuronal and
hemodynamic states, and
get the following state-space model.
And this a sort of standard state space
model that people know how to solve.
And basically in DCM analysis is
performed using Bayesian methods.
So normal priors are placed on
the unknown thetas here and
the posterior density is used to make
inferences about the connections.
Finally, model comparisons, the comparison
between different suggested models, can
be performed to determine whether the data
favors one of the models over another.
And so this is done,
using Bayesian model comparisons.
So, there's something called the model
evidence, which is the probability of
the data, given a specific model, and
it can be computed in the following way.
Now, in order to compare models
one computes something called
the Bayes factor.
So the Bayes factor,
we'll call this B i of j,
is basically the ratio
of the model evidence
from model i divided by
the model evidence for model j.
So if Bij is large, and
by large I mean bigger than one,
than i is more likely than j.
And if Bij is less than one,
then j is more likely than i.
Now, in order to compute this,
various approximations exist,
including negative free energy,
AIC, or BIC.
And this is all implemented in the SBM
software that's very popular in
the neuro-imaging community.
Here's an example from the UCL
group who's behind SBM,
and here they're showing three different
models here that they want to compare, and
they use Bayes factors to compare
the three different candidate DCMs and
find the one that is the mostly likely.
So, that's the end of this module.
Here, I've just tried to give you a brief
feel for what dynamic causal modeling is.
Again, this is implemented
in the SBN software.
And it tends to be quite mathematical, but
I just wanted to give you a basic feel for
what's going on there so
you could read papers about it and
have a general idea understanding.
Okay.
In the next module we'll talk about
Granger causality.
I'll see you then.
Bye.
[SOUND]